# Conserving ecosystems to increase community resilience

## Environmental Foundation (Guarantee) Limited, Sri Lanka

This vital project aims to facilitate local solutions to pressing
environmental, economic and social challenges in the viscinity of the
Maha Oya, one of Sri Lanka's major rivers, which flows west into the sea
about 40 kilometres above Colombo. Since the late 1980s, excessive river
sand mining has resulted in unprecedented degradation of ecosystems
related to the River Maha Oya. The coastline, which is fed by sediment
transported by the river, is severely eroded. The river is crucial not
only to climate regulation but to local communities, providing drinking
and other water for domestic and commercial purposes. It supports
numerous livelihoods such as ecotourism and fishing as well as being an
area for recreation and of outstanding natural beauty.

This innovative project aims to restore and conserve essential
ecosystems downriver of the Maha Oya, and increase the resilience of
coastal and riverine communities to environmental threats and disasters.
Its integrated approach, already tested on a 10-kilometre stretch of the
downstream river, generates relevant scientific and policy information
through research and evaluates precious ecosystem goods and services. It
employs creative and contemporary methods to engage and empower local
communities, in particular local youth, with a view to fostering project
stewardship and sustainability. Ground-breaking steps have been taken to
declare a number of "no-mining zones". Miners are discouraged from
detrimental sand mining and urged towards more environmentally friendly
and sustainable income sources. This pioneering approach involves, among
other things, linking families to industrial/commercial groups,
assisting in job applications and investigating self-employment options.
In addition, efforts are being made to restore degraded areas with
tree-planting and pegging in order to trap sediment. The objective of
this new and important project is to improve the methodology and scale
it up so that it can be applied to a longer stretch of the river. This
will identify long term issues and facilitate an integrated and holistic
river management plan drafted with the participation of all
stakeholders.
