# Lensational, China

Lensational is a non-profit social enterprise recycling digital cameras
from the developed world to empower poor urban women in developing Asia.
Its vision is to equip underprivileged, often illiterate, women with a
way to express themselves by giving them access to cameras and
photography training and by providing sales channels for them to sell
their photographs. This inspired project empowers women economically,
facilitating the earning of income through selling photography
merchandise and stock photographs and it provides an outlet for womenâ€™s
creativity and expression.

The advent of smartphones and digital SLR cameras has led to a decline
in traditional digiVtal cameras in the developed world. Lensational
ships unwanted equipment, received as donations, to locations where it
is sold to women at heavily discounted prices. A fundament of dignity
underpins the concept of women paying for the cameras, instead of
receiving them passively. Online accounts allow donors to track the
photographs taken with their donated cameras, forming a bridge between
the photographers and the donors. This visionary project understands
that visualizing social impact is the greatest incentive for individuals
to donate.

Freedom of expression is a human right. Many women are denied a voice
and face barriers to their active participation in society. Access to a
camera provides a woman with a new way to express herself and empowers
her both economically and emotionally. Photography overcomes social
isolation and its flexible nature allows women to pursue freelance
opportunities and earn an income alongside their care responsibilities.
Lensational has a sustainable, scalable and innovative business model
with three key activities: 1) recycling cameras in the developed world;
2) reselling second-hand cameras and conducting photography training; 3)
selling photography merchandise and stock photographs through our local
shops, online and via partner agencies.

Successful pilot programs have been conducted in Hong Kong, Myanmar and
Pakistan, benefiting 150 women. The results of this pioneering project
have been shared with over 800 visitors to photo exhibitions in Hong
Kong, London and New York, and close to 2,500 supporters via social
media.

