# Organic sack gardening
## Dhaka Urban Food Security Movement Project, Bangladesh

This pioneering project encourages urban Bangladeshis to grow vegetables
in sacks. "Organic Sack Gardening" provides many advantages. It can be
done with little space and using waste water. The innovative method is
cheap and it allows for year-round cultivation. Eight to ten sacks can
provide a household with a regular supply of vegetables. This initiative
fosters social change by improving nutrition and food security in a land
fraught with poverty, malnutrition and problems related to climate
change.

Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, is one of the world's fastest growing
mega cities. With a population of approximately 20 million living in an
area of 131 km2 it is also one of the most densely populated cities on
the planet. Dhaka ranks as one of the bottom ten cities in the world to
live in according to a study by the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2014.
It is challenged by unplanned urbanization, growing urban poverty,
growth of urban slums and squatters, food insecurity, solid waste
management and environmental degradation.

This creative concept was initiated and became popular in the Sylhet
region of north-east Bangladesh. In response to initial success, the
project was subsequently tried by a number of urban households. Given
the growing interest in organic sack gardening, plans are being made to
disseminate this inventive technology more widely among citizens to
harness its many benefits.

This innovative project aims to make Dhaka a model green city, where
citizens plant organic sack gardens in apartments, slums and schools.
This will not only support the supply of safe and nutritional vegetables
in the city, but also empower economically-challenged households.
Moreover, sack gardening will educate urban school students about how to
grow organic food and increase their understanding about farmers and
agriculture in general. It will also encourage and initiate relevant
discussions about food safety and nutrition.

