# Urine for wealth

## Environmental Industries, Malawi

This innovative project from Environmental Industries processes nitrogen
fertiliser from human urine. The urine is harvested from ecological
sanitation toilets situated in crowded markets in Malawi's urban
centres. The fully-sustainable finished product is 100 per cent liquid
organic nitrogen and is branded "Bionitrate".

Eighty per cent of Malawi's productive population is engaged in farming.
However, as farmers have few resources and many do not even own land for
raising animals, it is difficult to obtain animal manure for use in
agriculture. Consequently, farmers are heavily dependent on imported
chemical fertilisers. Chemical fertilisers not only degrade soils, but
they are becoming prohibitively expensive. Urine fertilisers have proved
beneficial to society in two ways: they are applied directly to crops,
which helps counter high levels of acidity in the soil. Yields from
crops where urine fertilisers are applied have proved to be as good as,
or even better than crops treated with chemical fertilisers. Secondly,
Bionitrate is applied to compost heaps as you build them up. The compost
produced is thus fortified with nitrogen and therefore more fertile.

This project currently engages 102 self-employed women. Every day they
collect the urine and other garbage from the market for compost making.
Consequently, sanitation in the marketplace is also improving. The
compost produced is applied to crops or is sold to local landscaping
companies. Increased funds are required to sustain this project.
Improved storage facilities are needed for harvested urine and a vehicle
is needed to transport finished products to farms. The greatest
challenge, however, is resistance to using fertiliser made from human
waste. Consumers believe it is unhygienic. To change this mindset, an
intensified education programme is required. To date, results are
positive and progress is being made in terms of promoting this
technology and its benefits. The aim is to increase the number of
consumers by 100 per cent within five years.
